we've now identified one metric that can
predict all-cause mortality almost
better than almost any other single
metric so i tell people avoid those
foods because it makes it really hard
for you to connect to the signals that
your body's telling you because these
foods are so good at overwriting all
those signals
[Music]
salda stefano welcome to the show man
thanks i appreciate it thanks for having
me man so the book is incredible super
excited what
can people do from
working out nutrition whatever the case
may be to burn that belly fat to live
longer to be in better shape add muscle
yes what's the key so as you know my
experience um i don't have tons of
experience in media um i mean now maybe
at this point at this point i do but
number one podcast and health and
fitness space yeah the book resistance
training revolution yeah that people
know yeah so i so um but before that was
about two decades of training and
working with people
and when you do that long enough and i
really care about helping people you
start to figure out what works and what
doesn't work
and what we tend to focus on maybe too
much in the fitness and health space are
the mechanistic actions and and that's
important you know like
proteins fats carbs calories you know
what exercise and kind of work out and
that kind of stuff and that is important
um but i what i try to do is i look at
all that in the context of
the average person
not in the context of i'm talking to a
fitness fanatic or
someone who's hyper-motivated because
that motivated state of mind tends to
fade like all feelings do also uh people
are very busy nowadays very sedentary
but also very busy i mean if you look at
people's schedules you and i remember
when we were kids there were no play
dates you just went out and played with
your friends
everything's scheduled now so it's like
everything's scheduled super busy super
sedentary
we're also surrounded by
hyper palatable easily accessible food
and
we grew up in an environment where
we learned how to value food for its
palatability and enjoyment and its
accessibility or convenience so that's
kind of what we're battling with and we
got to understand that context before we
really recommend what people should do
because if we make the wrong
recommendations it's not going to work
and we know this um people
fail at like 85
of the time when it comes to long-term
success what's the main thing what do
people either what's the myth that they
got involved for and then they find out
it just isn't true or is there something
else like why such a high failure rate
yeah well
the big reason is how they go into it um
and and i started the same way this is
how most people start on a fitness
routine it starts from a place of
for lack of a better term self-hate
i'm fat or in my case i'm skinny i don't
like the way i look
i i want to change who i am but it's
kind of this negative motivating factor
which you have to move out of into
a self-love state of mind like i'm
taking care of myself otherwise at some
point you'll stop you can't hate
yourself forever i mean how many times
have you heard someone say
you know you have a friend who's who was
on a workout routine or following a diet
and then you see him a year later and go
hey how is that
program going and they say oh i had to
stop because i just wanted to enjoy life
i mean
on it
logically it's insane to say that right
taking care of yourself improves
all aspects of your life and yet this
person says
i want to enjoy life so i stopped well
what do they mean well it was coming
from a place of self-hate exercise was a
punishment
uh nutrition was restrictive awesome
disgusting i shouldn't have eaten that
go to the gym beat myself up that kind
of stuff so that's one of the factors
the other factor is the approach um what
we've learned how to just the average
person has been told to value exercise
mainly by its calorie burn um and that's
so wrong because the amount of calories
you burn while you exercise is actually
the least important thing all the things
that exercise possible so
we'll probably get to the calories in
calories out debating at some point it's
kind not the place to start but
how is it possible
that i'm not just in the gym to burn
calories okay so first of all if i want
to lose my belly fat
yeah so calorie burn is important right
in order to lose weight you have to burn
more calories and you take it now that's
a very simplistic
uh way of saying it it's true but it's
more complex than that but let's just
start with the simplistic formula you
gotta burn more than you take in
the calorie first off the calories you
burn while you exercise really isn't
that much you work out for an hour
really hard you'll burn like 400
calories okay so it's not a ton and if
you work out two or three days a week
consistently like most people will
it's 800 1200 calories a week it's not
making a huge impact so that's number
one but the main
factor is the reason why that's not that
important is we're ignoring the most
important aspect of exercise which is
how does this get my body to adapt and
then what does the adaptation mean so
that's very important
if we look at exercise from an
adaptation perspective then we can start
to judge exercise and say
which one in the context of fat loss
which one is going to speed up my
metabolism okay which one is going to
teach my body to burn more calories on
its own because that is a much more
sustainable approach i mean if you're
burning more cat like right now i'm
sitting here talking to you if my body's
going to burn more calories because i've
trained it to do so
that's far more effective than me going
out and manually trying to burn
calories with my workouts also
if you do the wrong kind of workout and
pair it with
calorie restriction
you can actually teach your body do the
opposite you can actually teach your
body to become more efficient with
calories aka you can slow your
metabolism down which in the long run
makes things much more challenging and
we see this this people do this all the
time when you look at the average
person's
approach to weight loss calorie
restriction
lots of calorie burning cardiovascular
activity for example cardio and
starvation baby yes that's [__] good
man yeah and what you see is this
initial weight loss which
is usually comprised of some muscle and
some body fat and the muscle loss isn't
because you burn the muscle but rather
your body was actually
learning how to be a more efficient
cardio machine it actually pairs muscle
down which if you're trying to get lean
that's bad it sounds good efficiency i
love efficiency yes but in this case
it's terrible it is i mean if we were
hunter-gatherers uh and food was
difficult to come by you want an
efficient
metabolism you want a metabolism that
doesn't require lots of
energy but if you live in a modern
society with lots of food you want a
faster metabolism that's the best buffer
that you could possibly speed it up
right you build muscle build muscle and
fuel the building process
because
first off more muscle burns more
calories now i'm sure there's people
watching at rest all the time all the
time now i know people watching right
now are going to say well you know a
pound of muscle only burns an additional
10 calories or whatever which by the way
is inconsequential if you
gained five pounds of muscle 50 calories
a day over the course of a year that
could equate to seven eight ten pounds
of body fat so over the years
you're gonna you're not going to gain as
much weight or you'll lose that much
weight but it's more than that right
when you're sending the signal to build
muscle and you're fueling your body to
do so
you burn more calories even without
additional muscle because there's a
range of calories you your body will
burn
with the same lean body mass we actually
have this kind of flexibility more
versus less efficiency if you will so
you don't need to gain a ton of muscle i
mean if you gain five
ten pounds which wouldn't make you that
much bigger you would just feel much
tighter
but that signal is there we need
strength we need muscle and you fuel
your body with enough protein and enough
calories appropriate levels of calories
to do so your body doesn't feel like it
needs to be as efficient and you and you
actually teach your metabolism
to burn more calories
so the old way the weight loss you see
on the scale happens faster but then you
plateau very hard and then you're left
with the conundrum of
do i i got to add more cardio i got to
cut my calories even more
now if you do it the right way the
weight loss on the scale starts a little
slower but then you see this kind of
snowball effect
and
and i've seen this many times at the end
of a 30 pound weight loss journey you
eat as many or more calories as you did
when you first started which i mean for
obvious reasons a very sustainable
approach now i can eat more than i did
when i was
at a higher body fat percentage and
maintain my lean body and so those are
some of the things that we need to
consider when we're communicating uh
nutrition and fitness um but again
that's the mechanistic
portion of it which i talk about but
there's also the behavioral
aspect which i think is uh
either as important or more important
before we move on to the behavioral i
want to really just restate exactly what
you said super simply for people at home
that are going to do this so number one
getting into the gym most people think
of as getting on a piece of cardio
equipment you're on the treadmill the
elliptical whatever you're you know
like sweating your ass off yeah yeah
which so when i got lean so i ended up
dropping 60 pounds i did it through i
was lifting so that was a big part of
the victory but i was absolutely doing
starvation and um cardio yeah and i got
leanly lean it was amazing but i lost so
much muscle it was crazy and it was
misery yeah i hated every second of it
no i have freakish discipline so i did
this for two years
but the idea of living there was just a
non-starter yeah it was like because i
was seeing progress i could keep doing
it but you know eventually it was like
yeah i'm not gonna do this forever so we
wanna get you in the gym in a new way
this is going to be resistance training
you're going to be lifting to use sort
of traditional words we'll get more into
that
later but you're going to be lifting
whether it's bands and you're getting
the resistance that way or whether it's
you know a bench press or squat whatever
so you're going to go in you're adding
muscle you're adding muscle because that
is going to
give you the ability to burn more
calories even at rest even though it's
not you know some gigantic free freakish
number
and we'll probably get into things like
it's also a sink for glucose which is
hugely translational
but also
when you're sending your body the signal
to add muscle you're saying we need this
strength to get that strength it's okay
to burn calories we're going to give the
body the calories that it needs so now
i'm not having to like ratchet down my
calories in order to burn the additional
calories i'm burning them by giving my
body the signal that i don't need to be
as efficient with my metabolism so we
can call that dialing up my the speed of
my metabolism if you will whereas if i
go in and i'm doing cardio i'm sending
the body a similar stress signal but it
gets it's in an opposite direction yes
so i'm saying hey you have this stressor
you need to adapt to it but this
stressor is saying
don't add muscle
shave muscle because the muscle is
expensive i'm going to put you in these
sort of long distance needs so you're
going to need to be more efficient with
the calories so now if you're eating the
same
you could be moving yourself backwards
so you could be working your ass off to
add fat yes which is terrifying but is
what a lot of people do it is it's very
well said it is that's literally me
parodying your book that's just in case
people think i'm clever i am literally
parroting yes that's 100
all right my friend i have a big
announcement my incredible and talented
wife lisa is about to launch her new
book radical confidence in it she has
managed to perfectly capture the process
of how to go from feeling lost and
insecure to taking control of your life
and doing amazing things despite feeling
fear sometimes a lot of fear now let me
tell you nobody knows lisa better than
me but when i read radical confidence
for the first time and heard her
describe what it was like for her to go
from having these big exciting dreams as
a kid to then as an adult scheduling her
life around the tv shows that she wanted
to watch or how lonely and isolated she
felt instead of pursuing her dreams it
was brutal for me i would never say
though that it was worth it for her to
go through all of that just so that she
could write something down that allows
others to avoid it but i will say that
at least she was able to capture the
strategies that she used to break out of
that rut find her voice and begin doing
incredible things despite her
insecurities and fears that she wasn't
going to be good enough to achieve great
things order your copy today because if
you act now you can claim the bonuses
that lisa has created for you at radical
radicalconfidence.com then once you've
done that we'll get back to today's
episode all right guys read the book and
get ready to be the hero of your own
life peace out
[Music]
and a couple things that make this even
more uh i guess attractive for people
you don't need to do a lot of strength
training to get those results if you're
burning calories manually all the time
the more the better with strength
training a couple days a week or three
days a week is enough it's plenty
to elicit those responses in the body
and you talked about losing muscle
here's something that's very fascinating
about that
if you don't just lose or gain muscle
there's a lot of things that happen
in your body to make that happen and one
of them is your body organizes its
hormones in a way to do so so if you're
a man
and you're telling your body we need to
drop some muscle your body will organize
its hormones to do so what does that
look like that's interesting looks like
you just gave me the chills yeah it
looks like lower testosterone right you
get a higher more consistent cortisol
response your insulin sensitivity starts
to change a little bit right more muscle
improves insulin sensitivity in fact
studies on obesity individuals show that
you if you just haven't gained muscle
and lose no body fat they have
significant improvements in insulin
sensitivity in women uh their estrogen
progesterone organized to reduce muscle
mass growth hormone changes as well on
the flip side
if i tell my body to build muscle and i
feed it to do so it'll organize its
hormones in a way to build muscle what
does that look like a youthful hormone
profile so this is why studies show that
strength training is the most consistent
way to raise testosterone for example in
men it also and here's something that's
even more interesting increases androgen
receptor density so these are the
receptors that testosterone attaches to
and this is probably even more important
than your testosterone levels in fact
there was a study that tried to
yeah they did a study where they were
comparing men and their testosterone
levels and athletic performance and
strength gains and they were also
looking at androgen receptor density
androgen receptor density was a better
predictor of strength and muscle gains
right so
strength training literally opens up
more androgen receptors it's trying to
make your
anabolic hormones even more effective
and anabolic so people are constantly
looking at ways to
become more youthful hormones are a
great way to do that
strength training literally tells your
body to organize them in a way to do so
so it's uh the benefits are so
far-reaching you know you talked about
storing glucose
so here's something that's really
interesting i know you'll like this
strength training has been shown to be
one of the most effective
ways to stop or halt the progression of
the beta amyloid plaques that are so
associated with alzheimer's right in
fact i think it's the only non-medical
intervention to do so and at the end of
the study actually looked like it may
have been reversing
some of those plaques this was a study
done out of sydney australia and they
were quite blown away one of the the
theories is has to do with insulin
sensitivity um
you as you probably already know some
researchers refer to dementia and
alzheimer's as type 3 diabetes so what
you do when you build muscle is you
create a larger
tank to store
you know glycogen or glucose
but it also muscles also extremely
insulin sensitive so your body just
utilizes insulin better as a result so
building muscle is a great way to do
that and
another study just came out of sydney as
well recently that showed that strength
training
reduced all cause mortality better than
any other form
of exercise and cancer risk
this is so crazy so i've heard people
say this a gazillion times but i really
think people are letting this go over
their head
that if you look at the efficacy of diet
alterations and exercise
the impact on things like cancer
longevity
hormones like all of it it is so much
more profound than the most effective
drug yeah that it's like if you had a
drug that improved your metrics the way
that exercise improves your metrics it
it would be like a blockbuster
trillion dollar like thing but
because we can't just pop the exercise
pill people leave the most obvious
solution on the table yeah um
one of the best parts about it is that
the
improvements continue the longer you do
it whereas with medications or drugs you
know for example
when they compare exercise to
antidepressants for mild to moderate
depression okay so it's the most common
form of depression
very similar results
when it comes to relieving uh the
symptoms of depression but as you follow
the studies you start to see that
exercise actually starts to do better
now why is that there's no down
regulation of receptors your body
doesn't adapt to exercise the same way
it adapts to medications you know it's
like when you drink caffeine you get
this buzz drink it every day it starts
to lose its efficacy exercise actually
improves over time if anybody has worked
out consistently and appropriately i do
want to be very clear
appropriate is important here because
people push it too far or what yes all
forms of exercise can be applied
inappropriate and all forms of exercise
also have value i also want to say that
because i know we're talking about
strength training and i make the case
that strength training in the context
that we're painting is the most
effective form but all forms of exercise
have a lot of value they all need to be
applied appropriately what's appropriate
depending on even cardio you're not
throwing shade on it you're just saying
you got to be thoughtful yes um it has
to be it's based on the individual
what's your fitness level and your
ability to recover what does your
current lifestyle look like is this
adding too much stress to your body the
right amount is it improving the quality
of your life and you can always adjust
your workouts accordingly so it has to
do you have to do all those things um
but yeah when it comes to
improving
all health metrics mental psychological
and physical
as you follow along as you continue the
process it gets better and better
there's no medication that does that at
all almost all start to show reduced
efficacy and people need to change
medications and
you know what's going on here so yeah a
hundred percent and i i like to talk a
lot about strength training mainly
because you don't need to do a lot of it
to get a lot of these effects and these
benefits and it's because tom i trained
people for so long and i was i did a
really good job of getting people who
never worked out
to do it forever right that's the i'm
trying to look at how do i get people to
do something forever okay
the best i got was two or three days a
week out of people it's just i couldn't
turn the average person into a fitness
fanatic you know it took me five years
to figure that out but i'm like okay
mrs johnson is not going to be a
personal trainer like i am isn't going
to live in the gym
i got to figure out a way to get the
best results for her
in the two or three days a week that
she's gonna
you know spend time exercising and it
was strength training by far nothing
came close to it you know when we talked
about the metabolism effects there's a
study i quote in the book that was
remarkable it's the uh the study done on
the hadza tribe yeah really crazy right
so this is a modern hunter-gatherer
tribe out of northern tanzania and they
live the way that
we lived thousands and thousands of
years ago so they don't have any
electronics they
hunt their food by throwing something at
it and running after it for miles and
miles
they gather
uh so far more active
than than we are and scientists went
down to study their metabolisms and they
used some pretty sophisticated
processes and they said okay how many
calories are these hunter-gatherers
burning every single day
and the results came back and was pretty
remarkable
not very much more than the average
western couch potato almost almost
identical in fact
now you might think to yourself like how
is this even possible they're moving so
much and the average western couch
potato literally sits down most of the
time and barely takes 3000 steps like
what's going on
but if you look at
things from an evolutionary standpoint
it makes perfect sense
our bodies we wouldn't have survived if
we burned if our bodies learned to burn
six thousand calories a day as hunter
gathered you can't find six thousand
calories
as a hunter gatherer
their bodies adapted to that type of
activity which included a lot of walking
and running you know like again running
after animals until they collapse we run
for distance very very well so nuts i
don't think people in a modern context
really appreciate that there is one
thing that the human as an animal does
set thinking aside
we can track your ass down we do two
things really well physically uh and i
say we as a species because the average
person is really bad at some of these
things because we stopped doing them but
we throw with accuracy uh a kid will
throw a better accuracy than any other
animal and we can out last or outrun
almost anything now the problem with
running is it's a skill that we all lose
probably around the age of 12 when we
stop you know playing at recess or
whatever and you also mean at distance
because in a sprint a cheetah is going
to [__] us up
distance it's distance 100 we can out
track right out last not in sprint we're
terrible at sprinting um but we lose the
skill because we stopped doing it and
then we're 30 you know four or like hey
i want to lose weight let me put on my
running shoes and we go run and just the
biomechanics technique is terrible
that's why running is associated it's
the highest injury risk of all forms of
exercise because of the repetitive
nature and because nobody treats it like
a skill nobody says i'm gonna go run
let me practice running they say i'm
gonna go around until i'm tired which
anytime you're learning a skill the
worst way
to learn proper technique and form is to
do it until you're fatigued because
technique goes out the window when
you're exhausted and i you know i
remember when i first pieced that
together i was hiking up in the
foothills by where i live and people
would
run by me and as a trainer it's hard not
to notice biomechanics right some oh
that you know their feet are pronating
really bad or really strong anterior
pelvic tilt and that person is going to
hurt this person and then this person
ran by me and just looked beautiful like
a gazelle
and i thought man you know we evolved to
run why are why do we run so terribly
and say well that's when it dawned on me
we don't treat it like a skill we just
put on our shoes and go run till we're
tired it's about just working out it's
not about the fact that this is an
actual skill that we need to figure out
and learn
this is one of the reasons why the way i
teach strength training is as a skill
not necessarily as a workout so when i
tell people go to the gym
i don't say
you know train your legs until they're
tired until they burn or until you're
shaking i say
practice squatting
practice lunging right i don't say go
get your shoulders hammered i say
practice the skill of the overhead press
practice the skill of a lateral raise or
a bench press or a row and over time
that produces better results because
people treat it like a skill they
practice it rather than
work out with it and
you know i i can't stress this enough
an exercise done properly
will provide so much more value than an
exercise
practiced or performed improperly like
so besides the the risk of injury which
that's obvious
it just gives you so much more even at
lower intensities done properly you're
going to get way more bang for your buck
or time spent in the gym so i i
encourage people and i write in the book
don't go to the gym and work out go to
the gym and practice these exercises and
try to get good at these exercises and
then you'll naturally add resistance or
weight or you know heavier resistance
bands
as you continue to progress but practice
those movements get the skill and
that'll just give you so much more so
much more results yeah definitely i
haven't heard people talk about that
that's really interesting you go into
detail in the book about things that are
really quite counterintuitive
so bringing that background to the hadza
and the way that they the
one of the important things in the book
that i found so compelling is this idea
that this is about adaptation and so
you're going to go into the gym and
you're going to do something it's going
to inform your body in in
the direction in which it needs to adapt
so if you're giving your body the signal
that hey i'm an endurance animal i need
to be extraordinarily efficient with my
calories you're going to look like a
long distance runner
very slender musculature lean but very
slender or musculature
if you are focusing on explosion the
ability to deal with weight you're going
to look more like a sprinter yes and
when you mentioned that in the book i
was like oh damn like that's real
because a sprinter who's running and a
long distance marathon runner who's
running they don't look anything alike
no nothing and and i do want to be also
very careful if we judge
exercise by the people that perform it
at the highest level we're also looking
at
people who genetically were born to also
perform at very high levels so like if
you look at like michael phelps
someone may say wow if i swim a lot i'm
gonna get a really long torso long arm
short legs and right and a flat wide rib
cage so we got to also be careful with
that because we can look at the top
athletes but what we're looking at are
also genetic anomalies
nonetheless
yes lots of distance running will
teach your body to become efficient with
calories sprinting or things that
require strength and power
the primary adaptation is muscle and
strength the side effect of which
is a higher calorie burn now when we
talk about adaptation it's important to
separate adaptation from recovery okay
this is very important because people
confuse the two
they think recovery is adaptation now
they often happen simultaneously or
right around the same time but they're
not the same thing so like
if i got a piece of sandpaper and rubbed
the skin raw on the top of my hand
the first thing my body would do is
recover it would heal
the skin that was rubbed off the second
thing you would do would be to make that
skin a little thicker so that it it
would withstand the same insult better
next time around and if i continue that
process over time i'll develop a callus
on my skin
exercise is the same no matter what
exercise you do
the recovery process is different from
adaptation and the reason why i'm
communicating that is people get stuck
they get trapped in what i like to call
the the breakdown recovery trap right
they go to the gym they get sore
then they
the soreness goes away and they go back
to the gym and they get sore again and
they never improve and they don't know
why why am i not really getting stronger
why is nothing really changing i'm
working out hard i'm getting sore it's
real intense i'm recovering but then i'm
going back to the gym and i'm not really
seeing lots of progress
you're not giving your body the the
opportunity to adapt you're just focused
on recovery and when it comes to
exercise there is a
best dose and it's kind of like a bell
curve right so
on this end too little i'm not going to
get much of a response in the middle
perfect amount like it's the perfect
dose my body's responding it's
recovering it's adapting i'm progressing
on the other end is
too much
and you can always tolerate more than
what is the optimum amount so in other
words
people tend to and now i'm talking more
of the fitness fanatic but people tend
to do what they can tolerate not what is
optimal so they'll work out get great
results they'll think i can do more i
think i can do more this i feel good and
then they do more and then they do more
and actually get slower or less results
it's just too much it's too much and
they're actually not optimizing they're
just doing what they can so how do we
find that for the average person that's
you know trying to get
um
i don't know the more idealized physique
not a bodybuilder physique but healthy
healthy and fit yeah and you know
speaking to that um
a healthy fit body displays
what most people want to look like so
you don't you won't look extreme in
other words the extreme bodies are not
healthy those are extreme performance
like a top
nba player or football player or athlete
is not
optimally healthy they're just
incredible at performance optimal health
is a little different right it's it's
it's lean but you're not shredded
you've got good strength
good mobility um you feel good so how do
we know that we're doing the right
amount if well i just said it you feel
good first off after your workout you
should feel better than you did right
before you should not feel like
really you're dead absolutely man i've
been doing that part i have been doing
wrong forever then yeah well so here's
the deal tom you are you're
discipline is extraordinary obviously
you're the kind of person that you'll
just it's you're not going to stop
you're going to keep going you're going
to push yourself and there are mental
and psychological benefits to pushing
yourself to a limit so i don't want to
say that there's no there's no benefit
to training that way but for the average
person that should be few and far
between
so i think it's good you should
definitely push yourself sometimes but
most the time you should feel better at
the end you go into your workout and
afterwards you're like oh man i feel
great what another way to know
especially in the first i'd say maybe
three years of exercise is strength if
you're getting stronger you're doing a
lot right it's hard to get stronger
and to have bad nutrition poor sleep
you know incorrect or inappropriate
exercise so if you're if the strength if
your weight on the bar or if you're able
to do more reps or you feel more stable
in your exercises if you're noticing
that you're probably doing a lot of
things right but really you got to judge
it by
how you feel you need to feel better
i remember when i pieced this together
as a trainer
when i first became a trainer i would
get cancellations from clients when they
would be tired or you know they call me
up and say
hey sal had a rough night last night i'm
really tired i think i need to skip
today's workout or my back's i think i
tweaked it yesterday so let's skip
today's workout
later on as i became a more effective
trainer i had the opposite people would
call me and say
hey
i know i have a session today but i'm
really stressed out you think i come see
you wow or hey my back is not feeling so
good i know we're not supposed to work
out today but can you see me so that we
can make my back feel better chills
again that that is for sure
just speaking to back pain for a second
whenever somebody tells me they have
back pain i'm like you need to be
deadlifting now you have to be careful
because you can definitely get yourself
in trouble with deadlifts but my back
only hurts if i skip
deadlifting but if i'm deadlifting with
proper form and a weight that's
appropriate to use your words yes then
i'm good and so my natural inclination
when i'm in pain my natural inclination
is to figure out is there an imbalance
here is there something i've been
slacking on it isn't like oh i bet i'm
over training yeah strength makes us
resilient
strength is what makes us
mobile mobility comes from strength
immobility comes from weakness now we
tend to think it's tightness i'm tight i
need to become looser
that's part of the formula you know
if you're really loose but you lack
strength you're actually your injury
risk is through the roof you have
terrible stability you can cause
yourself a lot of problems if you're
tight without a lot of strength same
thing
good
full range of motion appropriate and
balanced strength
is what prevents pain it's what makes
your joints move optimally joints move
in a way to where your body essentially
moves in the most efficient way it can
with what it's given okay so if you're
weak or not strong enough not stable
enough to move in the optimal way your
body's gonna take option b and then
maybe option c and it gets the job done
but over time like a sliding door that's
uh that's slightly off track
over time what happens to that track
right it gets worn down you start to see
problems so strength
properly applying strength training and
appropriate strength training
makes you
you know bulletproof to pain you move
better that's how you build that's how
you build real functional flexibility
and i get people upset sometimes because
i say that proper strength training is
the best way to improve
uh functional flexibility people like
what do you mean i thought strength
training made you tight no it doesn't
full range of motion with good control
good stability
strengthens
entire ranges of motion right because
you want to own
ranges of motion i don't just want
flexibility i mean i have a 18 month old
son and i could put him on the floor and
i could take his foot and put it by his
head and put him in the splits but he's
not very stable i mean you put any load
on him and he's going to hurt himself
right not that i've tried i haven't put
any barbells on his back yet
but if you're strong within a full range
of motion and you're on the floor and
you're playing with your kids or you're
twisting or whatever you own that full
range of motion
you're you're not going to hurt yourself
you're very strong
and that's what proper strength training
would do now the the reason why we see
people who sometimes lift a lot of
weights look so tight is because they
don't train
properly in that context they train in
short ranges of motion you'll see this
bodybuilder sometimes
to build muscle
uh but because of those because those
ranges of motion are short they build
strength in that range of motion then
what's outside of that range of motion
is imbalanced so their body learns to
move in this kind of limited tight
you know what they used to call muscle
bound range of motion so you know i i
really try to break through the myths
and the stigma
that surrounds strength training because
there's so much around it
you know for a long time tom there were
no studies that were done on strength
training and health and longevity there
were none there were performance
studies but none on health all studies
for health and longevity revolved around
cardiovascular activity
you know 30 to 60 minutes of vigorous
cardiovascular activity and of course
there's health benefits right like i
said any form of activity done properly
will improve your health but there was
nothing
for strength training there was nothing
in the last 15 to 20 years though there
have been lots of studies and they're
finding incredible results it's one of
the best forms of exercise for heart
health who would have said strength
training is good for your heart right
i had a cardiologist on my podcast who
said this is how i recommend all my
clients or all my patients resistance
training yes because of cardio no and he
says i mean literally cardio is the word
for heart in greek i know now now he
says if you're only going to pick one
form of exercise if you only have time
to do one do strength training then if
you can add another one add the cardio
wow he says never heard that before it's
i mean it's you're gonna start to see
this more and more as the studies start
to support this more and more what is up
my friends i have huge news for you
about one of the most exciting and
important projects i've ever worked on
in my life as you guys know it is my
mission to help teach people about how
to build a mindset and the skills that
they're gonna need to live an
extraordinary life and over the last few
months i've been working hard behind the
scenes to create a brand new tool that
will help you do exactly that it's
called project kaizen and i'm proud to
announce that i'll be bringing it to the
world later this year project kaizen is
a web 3 based game like experience that
is a story based world that's going to
allow you to get inside build an avatar
that is aspirational of who you want to
become and then take the path of the
warrior seeking continuous improvement
inside of a story world and game
experience all right my friend i cannot
tell you how excited i am about this
amazing new project which i think ushers
in a whole new form of entertainment and
i want to meet you inside of project
kaizen and help you have fun
with these ideas of always getting
better all right click the link and join
me in discord and until then my friends
be legendary take care peace
do you know what the mechanism is like
why would
getting strong help your heart
especially because now i'm privy to just
i've heard you talk about this so much
but you said there was a guy that used
to watch train and he was just like oh
i've got a second he would like bang out
a few sets and you were like but no how
do you really train he's like no that is
i just when i have a second i'll jump in
for you know three reps or whatever yeah
conditioning and longevity uh are
related but not exactly the same thing
so like if you look at extreme
distance runners or extreme endurance
athletes you actually start to see
declining health in their hearts just
lots of damage distance yes like like or
any extreme athlete okay um you start to
see declines in longevity now we
associate cardiovascular activity with
heart performance which is why we think
it's the best way to exercise for heart
health and it is a good way to exercise
for heart health but i think the reason
why strength training is showing now to
be so good for heart health has to do
with its ability to keep you lean to
just keep you from
storing too much body fat visceral body
fat and any and look
although it's not going to build stamina
and endurance like other forms of
exercise you do build
some stamin and endurance i mean do a
set of 20 reps of the barbell squat and
tell me you're not you know breathing
really hard so you still do build that
um and again when we're talking about
longevity it's different than just
performance i love walking this is what
i always recommend to people i tell
people
walk every single day and i teach them
to inject it into their daily routines
so it's not a scheduled workout it's
more likely to be consistent and that's
where i see people get
great health benefits because you know
10 minute walk after breakfast lunch and
dinner 30 minutes a day
and they get great longevity effects as
a result but yeah when it comes to the
brain
the heart
functional flexibility
strength training is uh incredible and
and i'm sure you're familiar with this
one metric
we've now identified one metric that can
predict all-cause mortality almost
better than almost any other single
metric
and it sounds silly but it's a simple
grip test
it's a strength test do you think that's
a proxy or is there something about
actual grip strength like if i just work
my grip no would i be good or that's
like a no i think it represents overall
uh
strength of the body and so when you're
weak in your grip that tells us a lot
about your body
and your health
and declining muscle masses is huge as
we get older it's probably one of the
main reasons why we have declining
health as we go loss of mobility
insulin sensitivity goes down hormones
start to change our body's ability to
burn
body fat really starts to change and get
go for the worse we have the the brain
effects
you know
speaking to the brain effects
strength training is
more complex in its movements than other
forms of exercise like it's not like the
same thing over and over like if you
swim or you bike or you row or you run
there's at least i mean i could probably
name
a hundred strength training exercises
and i'm sure there's you know 100 or 500
more and there's five different ways to
perform each one
when you're doing strength training
you're moving in different planes
you're training your proprioceptive
ability i have to have to tell people
what that means proprioception is
knowing where my body is in space right
so if i do six different exercises well
one of them is going to have me
lifting something overhead one of them
might have me doing a horizontal
movement i may be rotating or stepping
to the side or stepping back or stepping
forward it involves lots of balance and
lots of focus from the brain it's harder
to check out when you're doing strength
training you know when you're doing a
hard set of push-ups or
or rows you're doing it you're in it
versus checking out when you're doing
other forms of repetitive exercise so
and i think there's benefit to that as
well but when it comes to training the
brain
moving the body and training the muscles
in a way that is appropriately strenuous
in different planes of
motion it trains the brain it keeps that
brain your brain's ability to do those
types of things
youthful
and effective whereas if i stop doing
those things
you lose it that old adage you know you
don't use it you lose it it's super true
your body prunes things off
that it doesn't think it needs so i mean
in fact the the population that really
benefits from strength training more
than anybody is the older population
the the results they get are
profound i mean is there some crazy
correlation between muscle mass and
longevity huge
just strength training alone
they just did a large study comparing uh
cancer risk reducing cancer risk in
different forms of exercise strength
training blew all the other ones away it
was like a 25 or 30 percent reduction
in cancer risk what i'm talking about
man if there was a drug that could give
you a 25 reduced rate
i'd eat them like skittles oh absolutely
and then all cars mortality was
something like 50 or 60
um from strength training it it's if you
think of the things associated with
aging that you know tend to be terrible
it's uh loss of mobility
i can't go up the stairs anymore i can't
reach up above my head anymore i can't
close the hood of my car or the trunk
anymore
its
risk of injury
i used to train a lot of doctors and i
remember they used to have the saying
you know you break your hip and you die
of pneumonia right how do you break your
hip well you don't have the strength
which strength contributes to balance
you fall your bones are weak because
you've lost muscle losing muscle means
your bones are getting weaker by the way
is that because you're not putting your
bones under pressure yeah muscles anchor
on bones
if the muscle strengthens the bone
strengthens anything that makes muscle
stronger will make bones stronger
anything that makes muscles weaker even
if you're not putting it because i
always thought the the bone is like
you're because when you curl you can
feel that in your forearm like you could
tell that bone is like whoa i better
like really have the ability to control
this yeah it's both it's both so like
anabolic hormones that produ that
improve muscle mass also tend to improve
bone mass as well
it's this like the third time i thought
i really want to put a point on that you
said something earlier that i've never
thought about before that the mechanism
your body is using to make these changes
is hormonal yeah so when you put your
body under stress the response is one of
hormones which is going to guide adding
of muscle
losing a fat you know whatever the case
may be
and
that's interesting you're really
manipulating that hormonal milieu which
is
fascinating because when i think about
like oh you need to get your hormones
right like the thought that my lifestyle
could lower my testosterone and raise my
testosterone as a guy i pay like a lot
of attention because i make a
i make a value judgment about my
testosterone levels if i'm completely
honest it's like if something raises my
testosterone it is good and if it lowers
my testosterone it is bad yes uh it's
vitality it's your body's saying
reproduce we're healthy enough to
reproduce testosterone gives a man and
woman and women drive and and
you've referred to testosterone as a
female hormone which is i think really
important to reinforce it is it's uh we
associate with men but low testosterone
women give them the same effects that
low testosterone men will have so low
drive low energy
low motivation low libido higher body
fat less muscle less strength less
energy estrogen is also important to men
just like in women low estrogen men can
cause depression anxiety
so we need to have there's a balance
that we need to have and in the the it
looks different for men than it does for
women
but you still want appropriate levels
now strength training is not going to
take your testosterone down to anabolic
steroid you know levels it's not going
to move outside of the range but you can
significantly increase your testosterone
within the natural range just by telling
your body
you need more muscle because it's the
signalers right it's the it's what tells
your body to do what what you need it to
do or what you want it to do so yeah it
definitely
changes that and testosterone has been
declining in man now for decades dude
yeah i mean we could really derail into
some like
more philosophical areas because
yeah i mean
i'm curious what if you had to give me a
couple quick headlines like what is it
that's causing this societal level
decline in testosterone my best guess
from what i've read and to the people
that i've interviewed has to do with our
activity diet
and
chemicals that we're exposed to
xenoestrogens plastics
birth control uh these types of things
seem that
like because it's getting in the water
getting in the water and i also heard
this
theory from someone i thought it was
very interesting when women are on birth
control they tend to
desire mates that have lower they have
signs of lower testosterone now you're
getting into the interesting things yes
have you seen those studies oh yes yeah
they're red like a woman who's ovulating
they'll take a man's face and they'll
digitize it to make it slightly more
more masculine or slightly more feminine
so signs of more versus less
testosterone woman ovulating will want
the higher testosterone sign the woman
who's not ovulating the lower
testosterone birth control puts you in
that lower range um so one theory one
contributing factor may be that
the widespread of birth control has had
women start to prefer to sexual
selection yeah selecting for
men with more feminine cues it's so
fascinating i know it's early days and i
know the comments now are blowing up but
like
that to me is
is interesting it's very complex yes
this is not a and i think i don't think
we should ignore it i think we should
look at it have you looked at the
divorce studies on this yep yeah when
when a
husband and wife or partners meet and
she's on birth control and they get
married and then three years later or
whatever she goes off because they want
to have a baby there's a spike in
divorce
anymore yes
i don't know like people really need to
think about that when so
lisa went off birth control not because
we wanted to get pregnant but just
the when her gut issues started that was
like one of the things that got flagged
like hey if you're on birth control you
should get off it and i i started
reading all the studies and i was like
oh like do i need to like worry
and so it was really interesting to
think through that and start looking at
that there is i mean we're doing these
really grand experiments
at a pretty big level on
hormones whether it's you know like you
said just uh we're being exposed to
things that we would not have been
exposed to for thousands of years that
were ingesting chemicals that we
wouldn't have ingested for thousands of
years like i take um
an antihistamine every day and have for
like 22 years or something and it's like
there's no way that there's no
consequence of course
and so
and look i'm grateful because my
allergies were out of control it was
miserable
uh but
it i have to be honest that i'm taking
this exogenous substance that it's it's
having some impact yeah and that it
probably isn't going to all be good yeah
it's it's probably
cumulative and it's there's a lot of
factors that are playing into us but but
it's well documented and it's been
happening for decades like like the
average 30 year old today has
testosterone levels of like the average
50 year old maybe 40 years ago or
something oh
whoa yeah it's really it's actually
substantial it's a pretty big difference
i don't know if you've seen the grip
strength tests of college aged males i
didn't know they've been tracking this
yeah there was a they did it in the 80s
and they did it again relatively
recently and the guy's strength is like
significantly lower
than it used to be like working on farms
and yeah cars you've mentioned this
before so my mom's effectively husband
uh
he's just like gorilla strong yeah and
i'm like he never works out but he's a
mechanic yeah and so dude is just like
popeye forearms he's a beast yeah and
i'm just hi
like how do you get so strong but he's
just working with his hands every day
every single day probably some muscle
fiber hyperplasia going on where muscle
fibers split and become you know you get
more muscle fibers for this kind of
prolonged experience you know you ever
meet like a i mean maybe he's like this
but you mean like a 60 or seven year old
guy who worked blue collar his whole
life and it doesn't work out anymore but
still you know i was like wow why your
forearms look like that and your hands
feel like bricks my dad's like that my
dad since he was nine he grew up poor he
was in in sicily worked since he was a
child
and he's he doesn't work anymore but i
mean you grab his hand it's like you're
you're shaking a two by four that's
crazy yeah but you know along those
lines too um
the the stigma with strength training
has negatively affected women i mean
we're talking about muscle and strength
and all stuff and what tends to happen
when you talk like that is there's a
woman listening or watching who's like
oh no i just want i don't want i don't
want to look like a mechanic i don't
want to every time i hear that i want to
laugh out loud do you know how hard it
is to add muscle you will never
accidentally add too much muscle not
once never well see and what happens
when we say that because i used to say
that which is true
but what people would then say to me is
well i've seen pictures of women that
just they're more muscular than you sal
and they worked so hard to get there and
if they're bigger than you they took
drugs but it's even more than that
here's what i like to explain because
this this really illustrates it okay
i'll ask you besides going to
nba games
in real life go to the grocery store go
to the airport go to a restaurant how
many times in your life have you seen
anyone that's seven feet tall
jesus i don't once yes i mean less than
ten for sure yeah you remember it you
probably remember it because it was so
rare right there's a spectrum of height
right and on one end you have dwarfism
on the other end you have like seven
foot
tall humans
both are pretty rare the vast majority
of us are in the middle okay
muscle building genetics
are like that as well on one end you
have
genetic uh you know medical issues on
this end you have bodybuilder you know
muscle building genetics no myostatin
gene you walk up the stairs your calves
get bigger super rare i hate them all
it's super super rare and if you're this
person you know it's like people ask you
all the time if you lift weights and you
don't right
most of us are over here
you could train like a pro bodybuilder
you could take all the anabolic steroids
you want and you won't look like a pro
bodybuilder that that blows people away
that's how impactful those genetics are
so for women who are watching this like
you can lift weights you can get to the
point where you're working out six days
a week you're lifting you know hard and
heavy and you're feeding your body and
you'll just develop a really sculpted
physique you're not gonna get
freakishly big muscles or look masculine
or whatever you'll just get really
sculpted and you'll have a metabolism
that's on fire you'll be able to eat
more than most guys and burn it off but
that's that's about it now what is two
or three days a week going to give you
a fit body fit and healthy with less
work
with less work than than what was
required before you're not going to wake
up the next day
because you know i did oh i did curls
now look at me ah damn sal doesn't work
that way i wish i wish it did i know
totally now there was something in the
book that you talked about that when the
chapter heading came across i was like
no sal come on you know better than this
and by the end of the chapter i was like
oh my god he's right intuitive eating
yeah
and i respond violently yeah or i did
before reading your book how about that
i respond violently to the idea that
people should eat uh intuitively and
then i realized by your description it
is exactly what people should be doing
so how do people get there yeah so in
the reason why in when people hear the
term intuitive eating there's uh
usually a violent response or like that
that can never work is because
you can't you don't have if your
intuition is based off of
limited or no information you don't know
what you don't know
and off the fact that you've learned
your whole life to value food for
its palatability well now your intuitive
eating is based off of that so people
think well if i intuitively i'll just
eat doughnuts and pizza all day long
well yeah because
that's what we're starting so you can't
go from
where you're at now to i'm just going to
intuitively do this as if there's like
this magical ether i'm going to reach up
and grab the answers it doesn't work
that way we have to first
we have to move into different stages of
learning before we get to that point so
there's this has been talked about in
many other
arenas and i like to communicate this
because it applies so well here there's
four stages of learning with anything
that you go to learn the first stage is
uh you're you're unconsciously
incompetent
so you don't know what you don't know
you get into something for the first
time you want to learn how to write a
skateboard or you want to learn how to
do art or play an instrument you don't
know what you don't know because you
have no idea so then you get in there
and then you move pretty quickly to the
next stage which is i'm consciously
incompetent okay
all this stuff like i don't know any of
it but i'm aware that i don't know any
of these things that i had no you know
awareness of before right
the third stage is conscious competence
that's where
you have to consciously
think and act in a way that makes you
competent so i have to consciously
okay i need this much protein
okay this food has you know this these
carbohydrates these fats here's where my
calories are this is going to make me
feel this way this is going to improve
my performance
okay i'm stressed i tend to want to eat
this way when i'm stressed so you're in
that conscious competent stage but if
you do that long enough
and you practice long enough then you
move to the intuitive stage which is
unconscious
competence okay so
if you ever watch a kid learn how to
walk you can clearly see them go through
these different stages you know if
they're unconsciously incompetent then
they're consciously
income then they're consciously
competent and the kid has to
think about every step and you know now
i walk now i don't think about walking
it just happens right
that's the stage where
intuitive eating
um is now how do i get there
well first you have to identify
all of the values
around food all of them and we're we're
only really aware
of a couple or maybe just one how good
does this taste has it and how enjoyable
is it in fact
most people
most people in modern societies have
never really felt hungry
we haven't it's insane you know hunger
kicks in like 48 to 72 hours with no
food
how many people have gone 48 to 72 hours
and it wasn't a medical emergency
without food so what we connect
hunger to is actually cravings cravings
are very different than hunger
cravings are not attached to my body
needs nutrients and needs calories
cravings are attached to
emotions
feelings uh my environment am i stressed
am i anxious am i happy am i sad is it
the movies
am i at a birthday party am i having fun
with my friends right
that's cravings that's not hunger so we
have to identify
or decipher between the two
we also have to understand all of the
other values around food and appreciate
them and the fitness space does a
terrible job with this the fitness space
communicates food very mechanical
from a very mechanistic point of view
proteins fats calories carbs eat this to
get this result as if we're robots like
here's your meal plan i used to do this
as an early trainer oh you want to lose
30 pounds no problem here's your meal
plan and then you'll do great and then
for some reason nobody's ever able to
stick to it
as if we're not
complex emotional behavior-based
creatures right so what are the values
around food well
we've already identified the
palatability that's an actual value
there's nothing wrong with that enjoying
food for the sake of its how it makes
you feel is a real value
there's also
how does it fuel my body so physically
how does this affect my body there's
also
connecting with people if you've ever
cooked a meal with your spouse
or
hung out with friends you haven't seen a
while and had a maybe a dish that you
guys enjoyed when you were in college or
whatever you know what that's all about
there's also
can it help me escape or distract myself
what's my relationship to food and then
you also want to look at impulsive
behaviors we all have behaviors that
operate just under awareness that tend
to be impulsive and identifying those is
key
to being able to
eat intuitively effectively once you
identify those impulses and create space
between you and the action then you can
change
how you react to how do you create that
space so one what is an impulse meaning
like i go for ice cream or you go for
chips yes that's what we're talking
about yeah so um
everybody has that trigger food right
for me it is chips i like potato chips
are my absolute favorite and my trigger
is is boredom
if i have nothing to do then i'll reach
for this distraction of this food that
you know whatever so i've identified
that and so one thing that i did for
myself here's here's a strategy
that i've taught a lot of clients to do
is i'll say okay
first off
don't tell yourself you can't have
something
like i understand the sentiment and i
get the validity in that like i i can't
have this food because it's bad for me i
get that but
our psychology doesn't work very well
with that
extremely disciplined people can do that
most people are not that way though so
you can say i'll have it i just got to
drive to the grocery store and get
myself a single serving bag
and all that does i mean the grocery
store is only a mile and a half from my
house all it does is it creates space
between me
and the action so the impulse kicks in
i want those chips
i'll drive the store put my shield and
you'll actually let yourself do that i
will but usually i don't right i i'll
let myself but nine out of 10 times i'll
be like yeah
i want it but not that bad yeah and then
i'll deal and i'll have that space in
between me and that impulse but
all those things that i identified
those all have value all of them can
contribute to an improved quality of
life and health like
enjoying a meal with somebody and
connecting over that meal it also
improves your health even if that meal
is pizza and beer okay i mean there's
studies that show that
poor relationships are as bad for your
health as smoking a pack of cigarettes
every single day bananas right so
there's value in that but there's also
value in its physiological effects how
does it affect my body and then we also
need to pay attention to
all those feelings that we have around
that food because then we can really
start to
value foods for the real values that
they provide for us you know like
like i never loved vegetables i just
wasn't a fan of vegetables as a kid
but later on as i started to
look at how foods really affected my
health in particular gut health i've had
my own gut health
issues
i identified that well cooked vegetables
really does
magic for my gut health for me in
particular
over time because of that connection
i now crave or want to or desire to eat
well-cooked vegetables dude facts as
i've gotten older like eating well feels
awesome yes even when it's not food that
i love like
my thing i love ice cream that [__] is
tasty
but if i eat a bunch of it i don't feel
good and i want to feel good and you
have to you have to make you have to
bring awareness around all of this in
order for you to start to make these
decisions both first consciously
and then subconsciously and by the way
anybody watching right now who thinks oh
yeah right like i'll never create i'll
never want to eat broccoli over pizza or
whatever the food industry has been
doing this to us forever i mean watch a
beer commercial there's hot girls in the
background you're at the be they're all
they're trying to make associations all
the time to get you to enjoy that
particular
food or beverage according to its
associations um there's foods that we
we have good experiences around as
adults that we liked as kids but
objectively are gross
that's so true like i like when i was a
kid
if i got sick
my mom would take me to my grandma's
house and i'd be at my grandma's house
for the day and my grandmother would buy
the grossest like no offense if there's
anybody who works at this company
because i notice people like
chicken and the biscuit crackers oh god
i love those okay it's a cracker that
literally tastes like chicken yes it's
so weird so when i was when i was a kid
i ate those when i was sick now as an
adult i love them and i know it's the
association if you introduce those to me
now i'd be like
what is this disgusting cracker but it's
that association so this is a this is
very powerful and we can work with this
okay so what do the strategies look like
well number one
don't eat distracted
so don't eat in front of the tv
or your phone or your computer
you have to be aware while you eat by
the way that alone will reduce your
calories by about 10 to 15 percent
studies show that when people eat
distracted versus non-distracted there's
about a 10
10 to 15 percent difference in calories
okay so that alone will reduce
your your food intake or your caloric
intake but also what it does more
importantly is you're focused on the
food
how is this making me feel why are what
are my feelings leading up to this am i
anxious
am i bored am i depressed
am i really happy
so no distracted eating
number two
don't eat
too many or try to avoid heavily
processed food here's one rule that i
make for people let's avoid
heavily processed foods now some may ask
why you know why is that are they just
inherently less healthy not necessarily
yes for the most part but not
necessarily
mainly it's because heavily processed
foods have been so well engineered
to overcome all your systems of satiety
everything that tells you to stop eating
you're full
they've engineered these foods so well
to overcome that that you will eat more
it will make you eat faster it will
induce a more binge type behavior
because of how and believe me the
engineering that goes into these things
is insane it's the flavor and the crunch
and the wrapper and the powder leaves on
your fingers and the aftertaste and like
all this stuff is accounted for
when they make these types of foods and
they're so good at it that they've done
some really good studies
where they've taken groups of people
and they and these are controlled
studies so food studies are tough
because they're often observational and
there's so many things that can
influence you know
how food affects us but they've done
controlled studies well they'll take
people and they'll put them in
rooms
this room over here whole natural foods
this room over here heavily processed
foods they also
control for macros so similar proteins
fats and carbohydrates and then they
tell people just eat as much as you want
or as little as you want then they watch
them they count the calories they count
all that stuff then they switch them
okay now you go in this room and you go
in this room
the difference in caloric intake is five
to six hundred calories that's huge
five to six hundred more calories a day
from consuming heavily processed foods
whoa okay in fact
if you look at the obesity epidemic
we've tried to connect fat to it and
we've tried to connect carbs to it and
then we've tried to connect sugar to it
really the the strongest correlation is
heavily processed foods as that's made
up more of our diet obesity has followed
right along with it so i tell people
avoid those foods because it makes it
really hard for you to connect to the
signals that your body's telling you
because these foods are so good at
overwriting
all those signals so
just cut those out by the way that'll
result probably in about four or 500
calories
reduced in your diet naturally in fact i
used to tell clients as an effective way
to get them to to reduce their calories
i'd say eat as much as you want just
don't eat heavily processed foods they'd
be like really i can eat as much as i
want yeah absolutely just don't eat
heavily processed foods and then they'd
lose weight and they think we did some
kind of magic he's like actually just
you ate less you just didn't realize it
so that's the second thing okay the
third thing
is to
write down
how you feel before during and after now
i know it sounds kind of tedious but why
are we writing things down writing is a
very effective form of thinking
and it moves
reactionary processes in the brain to
the frontal lobe right the big meaty
part that is the the part of the brain
that helps us think logically and act
appropriately so writing down does help
bring awareness so i tell people right
before and it doesn't have to be
anything long a sentence kind of tired
or you know while i was eating really
enjoyed it or not that good and then
afterwards a little bloated you know
some energy or
neutral feel like whatever but all we're
doing is we're bringing awareness
around this stuff
and then you follow that process and
then what you do this is the last step
is you start to make changes and the
changes that you make have to be
meaningful so they have to be
challenging
but they also have to be realistic
in the following context forever
so you have to say to yourself
what's one change i can make in my diet
that is gonna be a little hard but also
i think i can do for the forever it has
to be those those two things and also
put yourself in an unmotivated state of
mind when you make that decision don't
decide things like that when you're
hyper motivated because we tend to over
you know we overestimate our abilities
always so okay is this realistic forever
when i lose motivation or whatever and
whatever that is it's fine doesn't
matter how small the step is it can
literally be an extra glass of water or
you know a
single serving of vegetables once a week
or whatever i don't care what it is just
start there and then do it consistently
you'll start to see results right away
just from bringing awareness but then
what will happen is that one change will
become
natural inhabit and then you take the
next step and you do another change and
you'll find that over time those those
steps become bigger and the changes
become more grand now what does this
lead to
balance
this leads to balance
this is the difference between
going to a party and getting offered a
cookie and saying i can't
and saying no thanks i don't want that
big difference big difference if you
want to eat in a way that's healthy
you're going to stay consistent forever
if you want to
if you feel like you have to force
yourself
if you feel like you have to constantly
say i can't
you know which is a very strange thing
to say of course you can who's saying i
can't right if you're in that state
eventually eventually
you'll stop eventually you'll go in the
opposite direction and the opposite
direction looks like uh you're rebelling
you know it's like i didn't just eat one
cookie a whole box
of cookies and it's great right you
again you get this balance sometimes
i'll have beer and pizza with my fence
most of the time i don't
right sometimes i'll enjoy a glass of
wine most of the time i probably won't
and you get this nice balance and
why do i talk about this so much uh why
do i mention intuitive eating so much
because eating needs to be
stress free and it needs to feel natural
you know in my space
the fitness space
there's a lot of these um
fitness fanatics and physique
competitors and bikini competitors and
people obsessed with their body
who eat very dysfunctionally now they
look shredded
right they look great if you look at
them on instagram but it's about
counting macros and everything has to
fit in the right calories there's no
balance they'll avoid parties they'll
avoid vacations they'll take their food
with them when they go places
this isn't a
this isn't a great this is orthorexia
right it's a it's also dysfunctional and
it's not very healthy it doesn't feel
very good um you want to have this
this relationship with food that feels
relaxed and feels balanced and it does
take a little bit of time in training
but that's the only way to do it
permanently there is no other way to do
it the other ways are
through sheer obsessive discipline good
luck most people aren't like that
um
or dysfunction
or you go on and off which is what
people experience they go on a diet off
a diet on a diet off there is no diet
right like that famous scene from the
matrix there is no spoon i think of that
all the time i talk about
intuitive eating
dude this is incredible the book the
resistance training revolution is
absolutely fantastic man thank you where
can people stay up to date with you
what's the best way to connect and learn
more so i'm on twitter now i i was on
instagram but now i'm on twitter you can
find me on the podcast mind pump so you
can find us anywhere you find uh
podcasts and then the book the
resistance training revolution anywhere
they sell books so amazon barnes and
noble target pretty much anywhere and in
the book i also give people uh example
workout routines and kind of break it
down for people on what they can do in
the most effective way possible with the
least amount of time i love it
boys and girls
i vouch for sal and the boys at mind
pump with everything that i have
they are phenomenal everything they say
is true and real it's nuanced as
hopefully you just saw over this
conversation it's incredibly effective
definitely get the book if you are at
all interested in improving your life
from a physical perspective it's really
fantastic
it runs contrary to a lot of things that
people say because it's real and it's
not a gimmick
so check it out and speaking of things
that are real and not a gimmick if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe and
until next time my friends be legendary
take care peace
most people you know searching for
health related topics are trying to lose
body fat trying to balance your blood
sugar
but i have other issues that i'm dealing
with and i
we need to have a positive mindset that
our body and our mind are malleable